When it comes to crafting code, aesthetics matter and so I strive to beautify code.  By beautiful I mean succinct, articulate, and well structured.  Beautiful code is pleasant to read.  Beautiful code takes on a vocabulary that matches the domain.  That is, every application should be extracting what's routine about its work into abstractions that simplify the work.  Those abstractions make up a vocabulary, a means of expressing the most common patterns of work that needs doing.  A framework (or library) should neatly embody the abstractions that are practical to a domain.

And it's not enough to have an abstraction that simply meets a need. The manner should be both elegant and expressive so that it's a pleasure to use.  That's the essence of real beauty.  jQuery wasn't the first DOM manipulation API, but it is perhaps the most beautiful.  Using it invokes joy.  Is its popularity a coincidence?  I doubt it.  Beauty and happiness go hand in hand.  Beauty is an API that makes expressing domain problems a delight.

The most fundamental of all programming tenets is [Don't Repeat Yourself]( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Don't_repeat_yourself).  This principal is about doing more with less.  That's why I revel in deleting entire sections of code.  I love having less code accomplish what more once did.  The most beautiful code is that which never had to be written.  Developers should prune ruthlessly.  Doing so adheres to the notion that "Perfection is achieved not when there is nothing more to add, but when there is nothing left to take away."  Beauty is less code.

One of my most enlightened moments was realizing the intrinsic beauty of narrowing your primitives.  I'll explain.  A framework is made to embody the abstractions useful to a domain.  And less code is better than more code.  The core abstractions that we use and reuse – our building blocks – make up our body of primitives.  Thus, we achieve greater beauty when within our domain we can neatly accomplish the same work with fewer abstractions than with more.  The fewer artifacts you can get away with depending on the better.  Sometimes upon reviewing our framework, I notice missed opportunities for abstractions to share components or other creative ways to eliminate abstractions that once looked necessary.  This might involve creating more fundamental abstractions that can be better reused.  It might involve replacing a simple class with the most basic abstraction: a lambda.  jQuery is the epitome of minding your primitives.  Most every operation on a jQuery object begets another jQuery object.  Beauty is making use of fewer primitives.  A primitive which begets primitives of its own kind is practically perfection.
 
When working within a section of code I'm mindful of the beauty of my surroundings.  I'm a craftsman at heart so I can't help it.  I'm bothered if things are not in good order, if the code is verbose, if the structuring is not conducive to easing maintenance.  I can't help when I'm already in a room fixing a broken light switch not to also repair the door hinge.  I want the room to be a nice place to visit.  It's this sense that I should [leave things better than I found them](http://programmer.97things.oreilly.com/wiki/index.php/The_Boy_Scout_Rule).  This means I usually go beyond the bounds of a work ticket.  When I spot a code smell, I scrub it.  I polish it.  It's second nature.  I'm conscientious and it bothers me when others aren't.

Only a grunt developer is satisfied by writing code that works today with little thought for tomorrow.  I'm dumbfounded that any code is written with no thought for longevity.  I'm not saying that code should anticipate potential future requirements – [that too]( http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_aren't_gonna_need_it) can lead to bad code – just that it should be structured in a manner that will ease maintainance and extension when the time comes.  My techniques are certainly not flawless, but I always give thought to what will help [maintainability](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Maintainability).  Don't call yourself a craftsman if you don't know what makes code maintainable.  A programmer who doesn't know is a programmer who writes brittle code.  Beauty is confidence that adding this won't break that.

Likewise, I'm bothered by developers who fail to recognize that software problems (including bugs) originate beneath what is visible on the surface.  Don't address the symptom, identify the root.  Sometimes the root cause is a deteriorated foundation.  A design which is sufficient in light of its initial requirements may become deficient under the strain ongoing maintenance.  Thus, sometimes a minor renovation is in order.  Beauty is easing future maintenance and thinking about the next guy. 

Though my professional experience has been primarily in .NET, I develop for myself in Ruby.  Ruby has shaped my thinking.  I love the philosophy that code should be beautiful and that coding should promote programmer happiness.  That doesn't appear to be the general sentiment at some places I've worked.  I can't understand how some programmers fail to make the connection that beauty does more than evoke an emotion.  That it actually makes things work better.  That, in turn, makes a thing more pleasing to use.  We tend to care about something more if it is well kept and maintained.  That reveals itself in our work and promotes quality.  There is serious value in that which extends far beyond mere aesthetics.  It disturbs me when so-called professionals fail to recognize the importance of beauty in making good software.

Though subjective, beauty is far more than style and taste.  It is not to be overlooked or undervalued or trivialized.  Code that adheres to a standard of beauty will very likely reflect that on the surface -- in the user experience.